Article Name: How the Coronavirus May Attack the Brain
Article Url: https://coronavirus.medium.com/how-the-coronavirus-may-attack-the-brain-f624bf05a8cc
Number of Words: 285
Number of Claps: 54
        
Growing evidence — both published studies and anecdotes from physicians and patients — suggests that the virus that causes Covid-19 is impacting the brain and causing a variety of neurological symptoms that range from memory issues to serious brain disorders. A recent study published in the journal Brain revealed that among a small group of people with Covid-19, symptoms included brain inflammation, delirium, strokes, and a potentially life-threatening condition called acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (Adem). According to coverage of the study in the Guardian, at UCL’s Institute of Neurology, cases of Adem rose from one a month before the pandemic to two or three per week in April and May. Exactly how these neurological issues happen remains unknown and under study. One prominent theory is that younger people are experiencing these brain-related issues due to strokes experienced during infection. As Elemental reports, scientists are gaining a better understanding of Covid-19 infections including the fact that the virus may impact blood vessels and cause blood clotting, which could explain a great many symptoms of the disease. Another possible explanation experts cite is the possibility that some of the brain-related symptoms happen because the respiratory system is failing and the brain is robbed of oxygen. Several research groups are taking a close look at cases of people with Covid-19 infections who also experience neurological symptoms. One such group is at Johns Hopkins, where researchers are investigating four possible ways Covid-19 impacts the brain. Here they are: Understanding the various ways Covid-19 may impact the brain is important, as is learning whether the nervous system damage people experience goes away with time or is long-lasting. Here are three stories on Covid-19 and neurological symptoms that are worth a read: