Article Name: Making Sense of New Research Showing Covid-19 Is Airborne
Article Url: https://coronavirus.medium.com/making-sense-of-new-research-showing-covid-19-is-airborne-f749a4aa3ba2
Number of Words: 731
Number of Claps: 166
        
In the early days of the pandemic, scientists warned that coughing and sneezing produced large, virus-carrying droplets that could cause infection if someone else breathed them in. These droplets were considered too big to hang in the air for long, but they could drop into someone’s mouth or nose, or onto a surface that someone might touch. So, masks were dutifully strapped on in an effort to prevent expelling those droplets into the spaces shared with others. Meanwhile, a related question remained unanswered: What of the tinier droplets that flick out of our mouths when we talk — or even just breathe? It is possible that smaller droplets can stay aloft longer, by virtue of their size. Can they infect someone else who later entered the same indoor space? How long do they stay afloat, and can they move? In short: Is the coronavirus airborne? These unanswered questions are at the center of a heated scientific debate that’s created a rift between the World Health Organization and at least 239 experts who authored a new paper showing that the coronavirus is indeed airborne. The paper, accepted into the journal Clinical Infectious Diseases on Monday, bears the title: “It is Time to Address Airborne Transmission of COVID-19.” It collates the existing research on this topic to argue that “beyond any reasonable doubt,” viruses including SARS-CoV-2 are “released during exhalation, talking, and coughing in microdroplets small enough to remain aloft in air and pose a risk of exposure at distances beyond 1 to 2 m from an infected individual.” The WHO resisted this evidence when it was released because the organization was unconvinced of the data. But as the New York Times reported yesterday, the WHO plans to revisit the evidence in light of the backlash from scientists, admitting that the possibility of airborne transmission, especially in “crowded, closed, poorly ventilated settings, cannot be ruled out.” While the science remains unsettled, the necessary precautions should be taken to protect ourselves from the potential risks posed by the worst-case scenario, which may also be the most likely one: that the coronavirus is indeed airborne, and that the droplets we expel when we talk, breathe, shout, and sing can stay afloat in enclosed, indoor environments and perhaps move across the room. This means continuing to wear a mask — when you’re outdoors in public and when you’re indoors in public, especially so if the room you are in is poorly ventilated. It means generally avoiding being indoors with strangers as much as possible, since it’s unknown how long droplets can stay suspended in the air, whether and how far they can move, or how much virus is contained in droplets of varying sizes. It also means not getting hung up on the earlier delineation between large and small droplets (sometimes called “aerosols”). Most experts consider this a false dichotomy anyway, as my colleague Dana Smith previously wrote in Elemental, noting that even large droplets can be airborne depending on the situation. In any instance where people who you don’t live with could expel droplets of any size from their mouths — and those droplets have the chance to linger in the air — it’s safest to wear a mask or avoid the situation altogether. Meanwhile, the guidance about physical distancing and hand-washing has not changed. There’s a lot we still don’t know about the coronavirus, and, frustratingly, that may be the case for a while. But fortunately, it’s already known what steps can mitigate the spread of the disease, and all things considered, they’re relatively small inconveniences with a potentially huge payoff. I keep thinking about this quote from Trish Greenhalgh, MD, a primary care doctor at the University of Oxford in Britain, who was interviewed by the New York Times regarding airborne transmission. “There is no incontrovertible proof that SARS-CoV-2 travels or is transmitted significantly by aerosols, but there is absolutely no evidence that it’s not,” she said. “So at the moment we have to make a decision in the face of uncertainty, and my goodness, it’s going to be a disastrous decision if we get it wrong. So why not just mask up for a few weeks, just in case?” Masks work. And if it turns out we have to wear them a little longer, and a little more often, it’s ultimately a small price to pay to keep the pandemic under control.